This is the repository for the metadata, sequencing/proteomic data, and code necessary for data analysis and figure generation for the manuscript titled "Distinct Host and Microbial Biology Distinguishes Lower Respiratory Tract Infection from Incidental Pathogen Carriage". Link to manuscript will be added once accepted/published.

# File descriptions
1. metadata.csv: includes limited, de-identified metadata for the entire cohort, including age, sex, clinical adjudication, clinical microbiology, mNGS hits (and the sum NT-RPM of the pathogenic viruses and bacteria detected), and shannon diversity index.
2. proteomics_data.csv: Relative FABP4 protein value for each participant (if available), as measured using the SomaScan 7k assay.
3. gene_counts.csv: Gene counts table, filtered to include genes that had at least 10 counts in 20% of the samples in the cohort.
4. CZID_data_summary.csv: Sequencing metadata and sample information generated by the CZID platform. These data include the total number of reads, number of reads reatined after each processing step, insert size, number of ERCC reads, sample type, control status, etc. 
5. microbial_data_bg_corrected.csv.gz: This files contains a list of all detected taxa in the samples. Each row represents a detection of a given taxon in a specific sample and contains abundance metrics (counts, reads per million) and taxon metadata (taxid, category, etc.). These data have been filtered using the following metrics on a per-sample basis. For bacteria and eukaryotes: NT_count >= 10, NR_count >= 1, NT_alignment_length >= 50 bases, p_adj < 0.05. For viruses:  NT_count >= 1, NR_count >= 1, NT_alignment_length >= 50 bases, p_adj < 0.05. The p_adj value is the FDR-adjusted p-value demonstrating that this taxon is present above the background singal using a negative binomial model. 
6. microbe_counts.csv: A matrix of samples (rows) and microbes (columns) containing counts. Counts here refer to the number of reads aligned to a given taxon using the NT database. 
7. known_pathogens.csv: A list of known bacterial and viral pathogens used to generate the RBM_results.csv and Viral_pathogens.csv files. 
8. RBM_results.csv: This file contains a list of potential pathogenic taxa in the samples identified using the rules-based model (RBM). The RBM takes into account both taxonomy and relative abundance of the taxon in the sample. This algorithm was previously published in 2018 (https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1809700115). 
9. Viral_pathogens.csv: This files contains a list of all detected viral pathogens in the samples. Each row represents a detection of a given taxon in a specific sample. There is information on the sample (e.g. infection category) as well as the taxon (abundance metrics including counts, reads per million, etc.). 
10. functional_profiles.csv: A matrix of samples (columns) and functional pathways (rows) containing relative abundance values. The relatie abundance values are generated on a per-sample basis. 
11. VF_info_file.tsv: Metadata for the virulence factors in the virulence factor database (VFDB 2.0) including gene name, gene length, host organism, genomic location, etc. 
12. VFDB_blast_results.csv.gz: A file containing the BLAST results generated from aligning metagenomic reads to the VFDB 2.0. This file is compressed (gzipped). 
13. virulence_factors.csv: This files contains a list of all detected virulence factors in the samples. Each row represents a detection of a given virulence factor in a specific sample. There is information on the sample as well as the virulence factor (gene name, gene length, category, host organism, reads per million, depth per million). 
14. water_sample_names.csv: A list of the sample names of all water controls. 

# Code descriptions
1. host_analyses_code.R: R script for performing all of the host- and integrated host-microbial analyses.
2. classifier_code.R: R script for generating host, microbial, and integrated classifiers.
3. microbial_analyses.Rmd: R markdown script for performing all microbial analyses, with the exception of the functional profiling.
4. functional_analysis.Rmd: R markdown script for performing the functional analysis of the microbial data with HUMAnN3 and MaAsLin2.
